 
.)$%,*"!$.,) 
=
puts the  legal rights of nature and the environment at the core of the state’s 
response to the crisis. @e idea is a form of posthuman, biocultural rights 
tied to the rights of ethnic communities to administer and control their own 
lands. In declaring the Atrato basin a subject of rights, the court required 
the protection, conservation, maintenance, and restoration of “diverse cul-
tural practices, languages, and relationships with plants, animals, microor-
ganisms and the environment that contribute to biodiversity, as well as the 
spiritual and cultural practices of local communities.”Q To achieve this end, 
the court created an in de pen dent expert panel and a Commission of Guard-
ians of the Atrato. It ordered plans to decontaminate the river, to protect 
ways of life, to undertake further study, and to end the gold rush.
@e challenges for the Atrato River to exercise its right are twofold. First 
is the challenge of actually implementing the vari ous declarations of the 
court.  Others may help tell the story of this pro cess. Second is the challenge 
that perhaps the court got something wrong. @e court’s decision fore-
grounds the negative aspects of mining, and yet the decision remains  silent 
on the ambiguities, tensions, and complexities connected with the experi-
ence of a gold rush. @e court had  little good to say of miners from other 
regions of Colombia,  little of the metal as a source of cash that brought, tem-
porarily, work and higher incomes to rural communities,  little of mi grants 
moving to the Chocó to ﬁnd some money,  little of who  those mi grants  were 
and why and how they came to the region,  little about the motors and the 
appliances and the cellphones and the expensive liquors and the beautiful 
clothes that ﬂew from store shelves,  little of the men who ﬁlled the bars and 
the  music they played that was the soundtrack to the gold rush, and  little of 
the Black and Indigenous communities and their diversity of perspectives, 
which moved from outright hostility to embracing mining through the 
development of internal regulations in a form of  legal pluralism. In short, 
the court saw  little of the beauty Antonio saw from that rise in the jungle, 
and only the horror I saw.
Certainly, the prob lems left by de cades of mining— mercury contamina-
tion,  water quality degradation, loss of ﬁsh, acid runoA, gender- based vio-
lence, and displacement— are profound. Yet, the court’s tools of prohibition 
may not work. Over forty years, criminalization has been used against 
Colombia’s other most famous illegal export— cocaine. @e drug war has 
prohibited cocaine production, criminalized its export, and enforced  these 
policies with soldiers. @e drug war has failed to prevent production; in 78;> 
Colombia exported more cocaine than ever before, and the industry has 
fueled de cades of internal conﬂict. Colombia’s civil wars have killed 788,888, 
;8 
.)$%,*"!$.,)
displaced six million, and dis appeared tens of thousands.R Despite a peace 
pro cess in 78;E with the main guerrilla army, the Chocó in 78;= was any-
thing but postconﬂict.
@e story of a gold rush is not unique to Colombia. Around the world, 
what is called artisanal mining (e.g., using hand tools and manual tech-
niques) and small- scale mining (e.g., using excavators and dredges) has 
been practiced for de cades.S  @ese practices have increasingly been crimi-
nalized globally, and many states have engaged in practices pioneered in 
Colombia: blowing up mines, burning machinery, and imprisoning miners. 
@e Atrato River  will have diGculty in exercising its rights if mining for gold 
continues to be understood as a  simple story. @is book oAers a more com-
plex narrative by considering the period from 78;8 to 78;7, when the price 
of gold was at its highest, when the boom times looked like they would never 
end, and when foreign multinationals  were prospecting for gold. It builds 
this narrative from ﬁeldwork in the mud digging at vari ous mines near Anto-
nio’s village and from a reading of media accounts and other sources.
'%.-.$.3& (!!"-"#($.,) ()* (%$./()(#  
()* /-(##- /!(#& -.).)+
@at after noon with Antonio, our boat had been low in the  water. We  were 
ﬁve: Antonio, Elisabet, Héctor, Fernando, and myself. A small troupe on a 
Saturday after noon day trip. Picnic- like. Festive. As we made our way ﬁrst 
by boat and then on a trail that led to the rise, it was on Héctor’s insistence 
that I took photo graphs.
What can photo graphs of mines carved out of the jungle not conjure? I 
remember the wooden pans that Pedro and Antonio used while working for 
themselves, the rusting excavators with their football ﬁelds of blighted land, 
the fears of multinational corporations and their proj ects for open- pit mega-
mines carved into the hills high in the Andes, the Black community organ-
izations holding workshops in response, the possibilities of wealth that lured 
men to jungle camps far from home, and the Black men and  women dis-
placed from their homes by  these outsiders.
On a global scale, my memories of lands and forests owned by Black fam-
ilies washed into the rivers by the work of the excavators and of the fears of 
the multinational corporations that would do the same, at ﬁrst, resonate with 
the story of the expropriation of the farms, forests, and livelihoods of 
in de pen dent peasants who  were displaced by sheep in the Highland Clear-
ances of nineteenth- century Scotland, which German phi los o pher, po liti-
cal theorist, and economist Karl Marx described as primitive accumulation.HT 
 
.)$%,*"!$.,) 
;;
Sheep are not gold, and the nineteenth is no twenty- ﬁrst  century, but an 
analy sis of primitive accumulation in which  people are displaced by produc-
tion for foreign markets resonates in Colombia. @e expansion of banana, 
oil palm, and sugar plantations in the zones of tropical agriculture, the coal 
mines in the Ca rib bean coast, the oil reﬁneries in the hot lowlands, and the 
drug camps and the  cattle ranches in so many regions are all forms of com-
modity production, often for foreign markets. Over de cades, hundreds of 
thousands have been displaced from their homes by corporations, landown-
ers, businessmen, and their paramilitaries and soldiers to make way for the 
production of commodities for foreign markets. Marx could have written 
of the Colombian peasantry in the twentieth and twenty- ﬁrst centuries that 
their “history, the history of their expropriation, is written in the annals of 
mankind in letters of blood and ﬁre.”HH
With primitive accumulation, Marx sought to describe  human displace-
ment and the earliest stage of capital accumulation. @e clearances provided 
wool from sheep grazing on lands once lived on by Highlanders, and the cap-
ital that pushed the industrialization of cities in Northern  England. In 
no small part, Highland wool built En glish factories. More broadly, 
colonialism— the Spanish in Latin Amer i ca  after gold, the Dutch in Indo-
nesia  after spices, the En glish in East India  after tea, and so on— did (and 
continues to do) the same. Pro cesses of primitive accumulation have dispos-
sessed innumerable  peoples in a search for raw materials, which in turn 
helped fuel the expansion of capitalism. “@e treasures captured outside 
Eu rope by undisguised looting, enslavement and murder ﬂowed back to the 
 mother country and  were turned into capital there,” wrote Marx.HI While its 
trenchant critique resonates in Colombia  today, primitive accumulation 
remains a totalizing narrative, which risks simplifying away complexities of life 
on the frontier. Drawing on Marx, one is tempted to dismiss Antonio’s com-
ment looking out over that rise as a false consciousness. However, to do this 
would miss impor tant questions. A story of primitive accumulation in which 
gold merely “comes dripping from head to toe, from  every pore, with blood 
and dirt”HK is unsatisfying. Blood and dirt abound aplenty, but so does much 
more besides. Why, for example,  were some excavators welcomed in by Black 
landowners?  Were artisanal miners like Antonio and Pedro  really involved in 
primitive accumulation? How can metal for foreign markets beneﬁt locals? 
Was the equivalent of the Lowland laird dispossessing his Highland crofter 
one of  those men driving a red excavator wearing a Hawaiian shirt?
@is man, who had carved out the landscape over the rise in front of our 
small troupe, was what every one called a retrero, a term derived from the 
Spanish word for excavator (retro, short for retroexcavadora) and referring 
;7 
.)$%,*"!$.,)
to an owner and worker of an excavator mine. He was one of thousands 
working on similar operations throughout the Chocó. @e term retrero was 
common, but the retreros themselves sometimes used the phrase “small- 
scale mining.” Activists and other observers used the terms “medium- 
scale” or “mechanized mining.” While in the Chocó, the terms used  were 
“artisanal” and “small- scale” in ways that reﬂected Colombia’s mining leg-
islation before 788;, scholars often deploy a more technical approach, not-
ing diAerences based on scale, technique, and  legal status.HL
In one such category, “microscale” refers to shifting  under < metric tons 
of ore a day, “small- scale” < to :88 metric tons, “medium- scale” :8; to ;,888 
metric tons, and “large- scale” more than a ;,888 metric tons. Other relevant 
categories  were  legal or illegal, formal or informal, and manual or semimech-
anized. Artisanal mining, following this nomenclature, refers to Afro- 
descendant, microscale,  legal, informal, manual miners relying on hand tools 
and  water pumps. @is was what Pedro, Antonio, Elisabet, Héctor, Fernando, 
and even I did. Indeed,  later that year, Héctor and one of his  brothers would 
open their own mine in the jungle, just as many young men did along the 
length of the river. @e small- scale miners, like that retrero dressed in a 
Hawaiian shirt,  were whom Antonio and I observed ripping up the jungles. 
@e man worked on an outsider- owned, medium- scale, illegal, informal, 
mechanized mining operation that relied on heavy machinery, primarily 
excavators on land and two- story dredging machines on  water. Despite the 
diAerences in scale, the excavators used the same princi ples as the artisanal 
miner: dig to the bedrock and wash. While Antonio’s  family relied on  water 
and gravity to sort metal from the earth, small- scale miners used their 
machines and the toxic heavy metal mercury to get the gold from gravel 
where once had been the complex entanglements of a vibrant jungle 
landscape.
)($"%& !,--,*.5.&*: /$('#&/ ()*  
%&/,"%!& &F',%$/
Both the Highland Clearances and the Eu ro pean colonial expansions relied 
on pro cesses that commodiﬁed nature.  Today, digging for minerals, pump-
ing gas, logging trees, netting ﬁsh, harvesting soya, and mining bitumen are 
each their own transformations of natu ral phenomena into substances for 
sale on global markets. Minerals, plants, and animals have long been ripped 
from one place to be sold for the enrichment of another.  @ere are many ways 
to understand such resource economies. In the  middle part of last  century, 
