===== Page 1 =====
‘With Grains in Her Hair’: Rice in
Colonial Brazil
JUDITH A. CARNEY
Introduction
Most people associate rice with Asia. But rice is also of African origin. Among
the two dozen species of the Oryza genus only two were domesticated, one in
Asia ( Oryza sativa ), the other in West Africa ( Oryza glaberrima ).1While Asia
has long been synonymous with the culture of rice, Africa has not. However, a
notable exception occurs in isolated communities of north-eastern SouthAmerica where descendants of slaves and maroons commemorate rice aspart of their African heritage. From Suriname to Cayenne and across theAmazon to the Brazilian states of Amapa ´, Para ´and Maranha ˜o, an oral tra-
dition claims that an African woman introduced rice by hiding grains in herhair. The precious seeds escaped detection and this, they explain, is howrice came to be planted. Even the rice plantation economy of colonial South
Carolina suggests a similar account. In 1726 Swiss correspondent, Jean
Watt, noted that ‘it was by a woman that rice was transplanted into Carolina’.
2
The oral narrative presents a contrasting perspective on the transoceanic
seed transfers that took place between the sixteenth and eighteenth centuries.It substitutes the usual agents of seed dispersal celebrated in Western accounts –European navigators, colonists, and men of science – with an enslavedAfrican woman whose deliberate effort to sequester grains of rice in herhair enabled her descendants to survive in plantation societies.
3The oral
history links seed transfers to the transatlantic slave-trade, African initiative,
and the subsistence preferences of the enslaved. This view of rice introductionis established across a broad region where three European powers createdplantation economies. It sharply contrasts with written accounts that creditEuropean mariners with bringing the seed from Asia.
4The only shared per-
spective between the two versions is that rice was introduced to the Americas.
Judith Carney is in the Department of Geography, University of California, Los Angeles,
California 90095-11524.
Slavery and Abolition, Vol.25, No.1, Month 2004, pp.1–27
PUBLISHED BY FRANK CASS, LONDON


===== Page 2 =====
This paper focuses on the history of rice in Brazil, where the cereal was
grown for subsistence a century earlier than its appearance shortly after thefounding of the Carolina colony in 1670. It offers a comparative perspectiveon the cereal’s introduction to the western Atlantic during the colonialperiod while engaging scholarship that argues enslaved West Africans,
already practised in growing rice for subsistence, established its cultivation
in South Carolina and provided the expertise for its development as anexport commodity. From initial cultivation for subsistence to the emergenceof a rice plantation economy two hundred years later, Brazil followed a devel-opment trajectory similar to that of South Carolina. Moreover it shares the riceorigin legend of Cayenne and Suriname, with a crucial emendation, as it is toldby descendants of those forced to labour on Maranha ˜o’s rice plantations.
An examination of Brazilian rice history provides a comparative case
study of the cereal’s history in the Americas under a contrasting colonial
experience (Portuguese versus English), power relations (European comparedto enslaved African), and historical claims (oral versus written). The objectiveis to illuminate the immigrant cultural traditions that initiated the establish-ment of the cereal in the American Atlantic for subsistence and export.
Atlantic Rice History: Overview and Context
Europeans routinely purchased surplus rice from African societies to pro-
vision slave ships throughout the era of transatlantic slavery, but neitherLinnaeus nor his successors imagined that the cereal originated anywhereelse but Asia. Scholars attributed the cereal’s early presence in West Africato Portuguese navigators who carried seed from Asia to the Upper GuineaCoast. This view only came under scrutiny at the end of the nineteenthcentury when colonial botanists increasingly suspected the red rice grownthroughout French West Africa was an independent species. By the middle
of the twentieth century, the international scientiﬁc community corroborated
this hypothesis. However, botanical conﬁrmation of an indigenous Africanspecies did little to displace the longstanding view that Europeans introducedrice culture to West Africa and the Americas.
5
The evolution of the rice economy in colonial South Carolina brought
attention to the cereal’s history in the Americas. Peter Wood (1974) andDaniel Littleﬁeld (1981) added a critical perspective to the prevalent viewthat planters, lacking prior experience with rice farming, ingeniously ﬁgured
out how to shape the colony’s wetland environments for the cereal’s cultivation.
They drew attention to the prior familiarity with rice cultivation of manyenslaved West Africans, the early establishment of the cereal, and the delib-erate importation of ethnic groups with that knowledge as the plantationeconomy developed. Carney’s (2001) research showed that descriptions of2
SLAVERY AND ABOLITION


===== Page 3 =====
African rice cultivation were already widespread in the earliest Portuguese
accounts of voyages to West Africa. Moreover, they illuminated the Africangrowing and processing methods evident in the Carolina rice economy.
6
While based on just one study, archaeological research in the Niger
River’s inland delta in Mali conﬁrms the presence of African rice in the soil
horizon 2,000 years ago.7Botanical evidence on rates of species diversiﬁca-
tion and research in historical linguistics on the emergence of the word forrice in African languages place domestication of Oryza glaberrima between
3,500 and 4,500 years ago. From its presumed domestication in the Malianwetlands, African rice diffused over a broad area. On the eve of the Atlanticslave-trade, the cereal was planted along the coast from Senegal to Co ˆte
d’Ivoire and inland all the way to Lake Chad in the country by that name.
8
When European slavers arrived in the indigenous West African rice
region, they encountered dense African populations thriving on the botanical
achievements of their civilizations which, in addition to rice, had domesticatedsorghum, millet and yams. Following the precedent of Portuguese navigators,Europeans relied on many of these staples for food and routinely purchasedsurpluses as provisions for slave ships.
9Centuries of transatlantic slavery
brought repeated deliveries of African staples to the Americas and the oppor-tunity for the enslaved to establish their dietary preferences in the AmericanAtlantic. The introduction of rice depended on the transfer of seed as well
as a method to mill the cereal for consumption. The archival record reveals
that European slavers purchased red rice from West African societies forfood, at times milled, but frequently ‘in the husk’, which meant that it hadto be milled aboard ships.
10Unmilled grains can serve as seed rice. A few sur-
viving archival sources and images indicate that aboard slave ships carryingunmilled rice, enslaved females were charged with milling the grains byhand with a mortar and pestle as was customary in African societies(Figure 1).
11
The maroon legend of a female ancestor introducing rice from a slave ship
is thus grounded in several historical facts. The indigenous African cereal wasa dietary staple of many African peoples living along the Upper Guinea Coast;unmilled rice ﬁgured as provision across the Middle Passage; and enslavedfemales milled the cereal with their traditional African method. Any unhuskedgrains remaining from a slave voyage could have served as the seed rice men-tioned in maroon legends.
Rice was established as a subsistence crop within the ﬁrst century of
Brazil’s colonization, as were many foods that originated in Africa. The
Jesuit priest Jose ´de Anchieta noted in 1560 that ‘from Guine ´there are
many squashes and beans that are better than those from Portugal’.
12Other
plants of African origin grown in the early plantation era included okra,pigeon peas, black-eyed peas, millet, sorghum, yams, the African oil palm,RICE IN COLONIAL BRAZIL 3


===== Page 4 =====
hibiscus, sorrel, meleguetta pepper, tamarind and castor bean (whose oil was
used for lamps).13Many of these plants would give regional Brazilian dishes
their distinctive taste, in a manner similar to the role of African dietary staplesin the ‘soul food’ of the US South. As growers and cooks of both food andexport crops in plantation economies, enslaved Africans left a culinary legacythat is seldom considered in standard historical treatments of rice origins in
the western Atlantic.
14
This neglect stems in part from a scholarly bias that privileges the seed
over the cultural forms of knowledge that guide crop adoption elsewhere.In emphasizing seed diffusion from one part of the world to another, ratherthan the purpose such seeds serve and the process that originally led to theirestablishment, Europeans place themselves in the foreground of historicalnarratives. But rice culture depends on more than the mere exchange of seeds:indigestible husks must be removed through a processing method that keeps
the grains whole. Until the mid-eighteenth century, when mechanical mills
were ﬁnally perfected, only the African mortar and pestle (Portuguese:pila˜o) could serve this purpose.
15Accounts that credit Europeans with the
origins of rice culture in the Americas fail to address the issue that its cultiva-tion depended on crucial African technology and expertise. An examination
FIGURE 1
TWO FEMALE SLAVES POUNDING GRAIN WITH A MORTAR AND PESTLE,
LOCATED LEFT OF THE MAIN MAST, ON THE QUARTERDECK.
Painting of the Danish slave ship, Fredensborg II, c.1785. Reprinted with permission of The
Danish Maritime Museum, Kronborg, Denmark.4 SLAVERY AND ABOLITION


===== Page 5 =====
of Atlantic rice history thus demands attention to transatlantic slavery, ethnic
and gendered forms of agricultural knowledge, and to the initiative of slaves inestablishing dietary preferences. The wholesale transfer of African ricecultivation systems, processing methods and culinary inﬂuences to the AmericanAtlantic is not adequately supported by discussion of seed exchanges alone.
While archaeological research has not yet searched for glaberrima in the
western Atlantic, it was unexpectedly encountered in French botanical collec-tions from the 1940s to 1950s in Cayenne and growing in a semi-wild state onthe perimeter of a former sugar plantation in El Salvador.
16The glaberrima
variety reported in Cayenne was in fact collected in a community descendedfrom maroons. Over the period 1550–1640, more than one-third of the Africansforced into transatlantic slavery probably originated in the rice-growing regionof the Upper Guinea Coast.
17The West African rice region overall contributed
40 per cent of the Africans enslaved on Carolina plantations and 35 per cent of
those destined for north-eastern Brazil.18Their forced migration to the
Americas certainly makes plausible African agency in pioneering riceculture in the western Atlantic.
Rice Beginnings in Brazil: North-east
Reference to rice cultivation appears so early in Brazil’s history that well into
the twentieth century some scholars believed the cereal a native domesticate.
19
Confusion resulted from the presence of four indigenous wild species of Oryza
in Brazil that grew spontaneously along riverbanks.20When Linnaeus
assembled his plant classiﬁcation system in 1753, only one domesticatedspecies of rice was known, Asian sativa . Archival sources make frequent
reference to a red rice that grew in Brazil’s early settlement period, but theydo not state clearly whether it was a cultivated or wild type.
21
Brazil’s rice history begins three decades after Cabral claimed the territory
for Portugal. The Crown had by this time divided Brazil into 15 parallelcaptaincies that stretched westward into the interior to the unsettled bound-aries of Spanish America (Figure 2). The royal contract establishing thesugar trade in Brazil in 1518 led to organized colonization in 1531 and thearrival of caravels carrying enslaved Africans to Bahia. From 1538 the bur-geoning sugar plantation economy relied on regular shipments of slavesfrom the Cape Verde islands and Sa ˜o Tome ´.
22In 1568 Brazil’s Portuguese
population was estimated at 3,440. By 1600 the number of enslaved Africans
ranged between 13,000–15,000. Nearly half were working on Bahia’s sugarplantations.
23Records suggest that slaves from Guinea-Bissau accounted for
at least 25 per cent of those brought to Spanish and Portuguese America inthis early colonial period.
24RICE IN COLONIAL BRAZIL 5


===== Page 6 =====
FIGURE 2
RICE DIFFUSION IN COLONIAL BRAZIL, C.1530–1620S
Source : Base map adapted from Q1 Halet al. 1987, p.2 [???]6 SLAVERY AND ABOLITION


===== Page 7 =====
Pero de Magalha ˜es Gandavo provides the earliest reference to rice growing
in Brazil, noting in 1568 the cereal’s presence in Bahia. As Portuguese andtheir slaves had settled the area, it was likely a cultivated rather than wildOryza species. An account by Catholic friar Gaspar Madre de Deus a
decade earlier also is suggestive that rice was being planted, as he records
sales of unmilled rice near Rio de Janeiro over the period between 1550 to
1557.
25These two records suggest rice cultivation was underway within 20
years of the earliest established sugar plantations in the region of densestAfrican enslavement.
Conﬁrmation that rice was deliberately cultivated occurs a few years later
in the Tratado descritivo do Brasil , written over the period 1570–87 by a
Bahian sugar planter, Gabriel Soares de Sousa. Soares noted that slaveswere growing rice for food in lowland swamps as well as on drylands with
rainfall.
26References to rice cultivation increase over the next decades with
the expansion of the plantation economy throughout Brazil’s North-east.Writing in 1618, sugar merchant and plantation owner Ambro ´sio Fernandes
Branda ˜o noted that rice had overtaken maize as the second-most consumed
staple food (after manioc), which suggests that the cereal’s cultivation hadbeen underway for some time in Pernambuco and Paraı ´ba.
27Reporting a
few years later on Sa ˜o Luı ´s, Maranha ˜o, Sima ˜o Esta ´cio da Silva observed
that ‘there was a lot of rice in the area and it was good.’28Whether it was
established there with French settlement (1594–1615) or following Portuguese
recapture is not known; however, Silveira noted that the French had intro-duced many plants and animals to Maranha ˜o. Rice cultivation was so wide-
spread in the North-east that in 1627 Frei Vicente do Salvador wrote that itwas grown all over.
29Figure 2 locates these early references to rice and
charts the cereal’s diffusion over the ﬁrst century of Brazil’s settlement.
The eighteenth century provides more detail on rice. Bahian naturalist
Alexandre Rodrigues Ferreira, who undertook the country’s ﬁrst scientiﬁc
expedition (1783–93), noted that there was only a red rice in Para ´prior to
the introduction of a white type on rice plantations in the 1760s. Widelyplanted, its cultivation was even encouraged by the government to providesustenance for the poor. It was known in Para ´and Maranha ˜oa sarroz vermelho
(red rice) or arroz da terra (country rice), raising the possibility that this was
the red African glaberrima species.
30
The documentary evidence thus conﬁrms that rice was planted as a food
crop in Brazil’s sugar plantation region where enslaved Africans were
present in large numbers. By the last quarter of the sixteenth century rice
had become a favoured subsistence staple. A century before its cultivationin South Carolina, rice was well established in lusophone America. GabrielSoares de Sousa’s sixteenth-century account attributed its beginnings inBahia to a ship bearing seeds that departed the Cape Verde islands decadesRICE IN COLONIAL BRAZIL 7


===== Page 8 =====
earlier. The archival record supports his commentary, noting that in 1530 a
vessel left the Cape Verde Islands for Brazil carrying supplies of sugar canecuttings, African yams, and seed rice.
31
The Cape Verde Islands and Rice Introductions to Brazil
Located between 460 and 750 kilometres west of Senegal on the West African
coast, the Cape Verde islands emerged pivotal to Atlantic commerce in theﬁrst century of plantation slavery. The Atlantic archipelago sits astride favour-able maritime currents that carry ships to the Caribbean, the eastern Amazon,and southward along the African coast to Sa ˜o Tome ´.
32Serving as points of
articulation between the African and American Atlantic, ships destined for
Brazil purchased slaves and provisions there. Unpopulated at the time of
their discovery in 1455, the principal island of Santiago (Sa ˜o Tiago) was
soon settled. In 1466 the Portuguese crown granted Santiago’s merchantstrading rights to the region between Senegambia and Sierra Leone, whichbrought thousands of slaves to the archipelago. Those who were not soldinto transatlantic slavery were put to work cultivating cotton, sugar andindigo in addition to weaving and dyeing the cloths (panos) that wereexchanged for additional captives.
33The island traders held a monopoly on
the sale of enslaved Africans until 1647, when the Portuguese crown
allowed the collection of duties directly in African ports.34
Settlement of Cape Verde and its emergence as a crucial entrepo ˆti n
Portuguese overseas expansion demanded cereals that would feed the popu-lation and provision caravels on outbound voyages. Its arid tropical climatewas unsuitable for the cultivation of wheat and barley, the staple grainsfavoured by the Portuguese. The crops culturally in demand for Portugueseconsumption and liturgy (bread, wine and olive oil) had to be imported
from the metropolis.
35For everyday food, drought-adapted African domesti-
cates sufﬁced. The continent’s cereals dominated the agricultural landscape ofthe populated islands of Santiago and Fogo. By the early 1500s enslavedAfricans were growing for subsistence and sale millet, sorghum, yamsand rice as well as New World maize.
36In addition to weaving the cloth
traded for slaves along the Upper Guinea coast, they raised the farm animalsshipped as food or stock to Brazil. Enslaved labour, notes Anto ´nio Carreira,
proved central to Cape Verdean merchants for ‘without the slave it wasn’t
possible for them to cultivate the subsistence cereals (to provision the ships)
and cotton, nor to weave the cloths, or to raise horses, donkeys, cows, andgoats. And without the trade goods, without the cattle and cloths, theycouldn’t carry out commerce on the African coast to secure the [trading]privilege they were granted.’
378 SLAVERY AND ABOLITION


===== Page 9 =====
In taking advantage of the botanical accomplishments of African food
systems in the Cape Verde islands, the Portuguese developed a pattern ofreliance on the subsistence crops produced by indigenous knowledge. Thispattern would resonate in the colonization of Brazil and settlement of thetropics. Initially established outside West Africa in the Cape Verde islands,
the African system found geographical expression anew with the forced
migration of slaves to Brazilian sugar plantations. On plantation provisiongrounds and individual plots, they established African domesticates alongsidethe indigenous food crops developed by Amerindians.
The pivotal role of the Cape Verde islands as a supplier of slaves and
provisions for transoceanic voyages had made commerce with the UpperGuinea coast indispensable, especially the stretch of mainland nearest theislands, which became known as the ‘Guinea of Cape Verde’.
38Located
between Senegambia and Sierra Leone, this area forms the Atlantic contour
of West Africa’s vast indigenous rice region. It supplied slaves from rice-growing societies familiar with the cereal’s cultivation and for whom ricewas the dietary staple. The region became Cape Verde’s ‘rice bowl’, providingthe settlements with food and ships with provisions.
Portuguese historian, Vitorino Magalha ˜es Godinho, offers a revealing
glimpse of the early commerce in African rice between the ‘Guinea of CapeVerde’ and the Atlantic islands. Archival records from 1498 document in
that year alone several shipments of the cereal from Guinea to Cape Verde.
These are likely indicative of an earlier trade in African rice for shipprovisions, as Portuguese accounts from the 1450s mention the extent of thecereal’s cultivation by coastal societies and the role of African women in itsmarketing.
39The rice shipment recorded in 1498 thus could not have been
Asian, as the trade with Guinea was underway prior to Vasco da Gama’sepochal rounding of the Cape of Good Hope and return voyage from Indiain 1499. Portuguese mariners returning from India were not responsible, as
later accounts would claim, for the introduction of rice culture to West
Africa.
40The rice trade between Cape Verde and West Africa pre-dated
Portuguese journeys to Asia and the dissemination of Asian rice seed.
Crucial aspects of African rice culture were present in the Cape Verde
islands from an early period. Rice husks were removed in a mortar with ahand-held pestle (pila ˜o) rather than with the hand mills then in use in Portugal.
41
By 1522 rice was available in such quantity on Santiago that one Portuguese
captain purchased three boatloads. Signiﬁcantly, this rice was destined for
Portugal. The commerce in African rice was not conﬁned solely to the Cape
Verde islands. Oryza glaberrima also reached Lisbon, where even before
1498 imports from Guinea are documented. The Portuguese metropolis con-tinued to import Guinea rice in 1506, 1510 and 1514.
42Given the signiﬁcance
of African rice in the Cape Verde islands and its role in Atlantic commerce atRICE IN COLONIAL BRAZIL 9


===== Page 10 =====
the time, the seed grains carried to Bahia in 1530 were probably glaberrima
and delivered on a ship carrying the enslaved peoples who knew how togrow and process them.
The Cape Verde islands provided the initial geographical setting for the
diffusion of African botanical resources and knowledge systems into the
Atlantic. The forced migration of enslaved Africans to Brazil’s North-east
in the sixteenth century brought to the region people already experienced inrice culture, who adapted the crop to diverse environmental settings andused African technology for ﬁeld preparation and milling.
Rice History in Portugal
The introduction of rice culture to Brazil is unlikely to have originated in
Portugal. Available documentation indicates that rice was not planted in
Portugal in the sixteenth century. There is no record of its cultivation underMoorish rule between the eighth and tenth centuries.
43Some experimentation
with growing the crop occurred during the reign of Dom Diniz (1279–1325),known as the ‘Farmer King’ for his interest in agriculture, but the cereal failedto take root in Portugal. While Guinea rice was imported at the end of theﬁfteenth century, rice did not become a dietary staple.
44
In the third decade of the eighteenth century Portugal began importing rice
from Italy as well as South Carolina.45The reasons for this are several. There
was a growing demand among the urban middle classes of Catholic Europe forrice to accompany ﬁsh on holy days, which numbered about 100 in the calendaryear. But its rising importation was undoubtedly also due to the persistentcereal shortages that had emerged as an chronic feature of Portugal’s econ-omic history. Rice initially found a niche in the metropolis’s markets as asubstitute for deﬁcits in domestic wheat production while Lisbon laterincreasingly relied upon the grain (along with cotton) to pay for goods
imported from northern Europe.
46By mid-century, there was a growing
emphasis on irrigation to expand domestic food production; both maize andrice were encouraged as irrigated summer crops.
47However, the cultivation
of rice on river ﬂoodplains of southern Portugal was dwarfed by its concomi-tant development as a plantation crop in Maranha ˜o from the 1760s. By 1781
all the rice consumed in Portugal came from Brazil.
48
Even though rice had developed under Moorish rule in the Valencia region
of Spain, the cereal failed to make headway in Catholic Portugal until the
nineteenth century.49One outcome of Brazil’s declaration of independence
in 1822 was the renewed emphasis afterwards on rice production in Portugal.Even so, the government’s efforts to encourage the grain’s cultivation facedthe outright opposition of many Portuguese peasants, who were concernedabout the detrimental health effects associated with growing it, malaria in10
SLAVERY AND ABOLITION


===== Page 11 =====
particular. Over the nineteenth century the cultivation of rice was banned in
several parts of the country and prohibited near population centres.50Rice
consequently failed to become a fundamental part of the Portuguese diet,unlike Brazil where it was commonplace.
51
When Brazil was colonized in the sixteenth century, rice was not grown in
the metropolis. Cereal shortages accounted for its steady importation into
Portugal throughout the eighteenth century. These were high-yielding Asiansativa varieties, already milled for consumption. Brazil’s rice history,
however, commenced two centuries earlier, with purchases of unmilledglaberrima as provision aboard slave ships. The cereal was already grown for
food on the margins of sugar plantations in the 1560s, nearly two hundredyears before its cultivation as a plantation crop in the eastern Amazon.In South Carolina rice shifted so quickly from subsistence to a plantation
crop (over the decade 1680–90) that the meagre references to early-cultivated
red rice are not easily separated from the Asian varieties introduced for plan-tation development. In Brazil, centuries intervened in the transition of ricefrom a subsistence crop to a plantation economy. An overview of Brazilianrice history reveals that the earliest cultivated rice was red.
As the plantation economy and slavery were drawing to an end in the
nineteenth century, written accounts of rice history were compiled. The roleof the cereal in the eighteenth-century Atlantic economy folded the earlier
signiﬁcance of rice as a subsistence crop into a grander chronicle of Portuguese
initiative and ingenuity in the agricultural development of the Americas.
52In
this version of Atlantic rice history, enslaved Africans merely providedunskilled labour. This narrative is contradicted in oral histories recountedby their descendants in the eastern Amazon.
53No other crop offers such com-
peting views on the cultural legacy that informed its transfer and establishmentin the western Atlantic.
The Rise of a Rice Plantation Economy in Maranha ˜o
In the mid-eighteenth century Brazil’s eastern Amazon (Amapa ´, Para ´and
Maranha ˜o) became the focus of the metropolis’s development policy to sub-
stitute the rice imported from South Carolina with a product produced in itscolony. Rice was ﬁrst cultivated on the lower Itapecuru ´ﬂoodplain south-
east of Sa ˜o Luı ´s in Maranha ˜o (Figure 3).
Criss-crossed by numerous rivers and swamps, rice had been planted for
subsistence in this region since the early seventeenth century. At the beginningof the eighteenth century a regional trade in the cereal was probably already inplace, as one estate inventory in 1712 records 828 litres of rice among thedeceased’s assets.
54RICE IN COLONIAL BRAZIL 11


===== Page 12 =====
Portuguese economic policies targeted this nascent agricultural sector for
commercialization in the 1750s by stimulating export production. Portugal’sPrime Minister, the Marque ˆs de Pombal encouraged rice cultivation on low-
lands and river ﬂoodplains and the production of cotton on the interﬂuves.As the Maranha ˜o economy developed, Pombal established in 1772 another
focus for rice plantations north of the Amazon River in Amapa ´(then part of
Para´). A monopoly trading company (Companhia Geral do Gra ˜o-Para ´e
Maranha ˜o), which operated between 1750–77, was formed. Both rice and
cotton were eventually exempted from customs payments in Lisbon, giventheir role as payment in kind for manufactured goods imported from northernEurope.
55Pombal’s measures resulted in rice becoming Maranha ˜o’s leading
export over the period from 1760–78 and the region’s transition to a pro-sperous export economy (Figure 4).
FIGURE 3
RICE AND COTTON PLANTATIONS AND QUILOMBOS: MARANHA ˜O, EARLY
NINETEENTH CENTURY
Sources : Adapted from Assunc ¸a˜o Q2 1996, p.435; Gomes 1997, p.216. [???]12 SLAVERY AND ABOLITION


===== Page 13 =====
The plantation economy, modelled after the successful Carolina system,
favoured high-yielding seed and the installation of mechanical devices toprocess the rice for market. In Maranha ˜o rice plantations concentrated along
the tidal ﬂoodplains and wetlands surrounding the Itapecuru ´, Mearim and
Pindare ´rivers (Figure 3). What enabled the plantation sector to ﬂourish was
the availability of mechanical mills, whose prototypes had revolutionizedthe Carolina rice economy, and Asian varieties that resisted breakage inmilling. Notable among the high yielding varieties introduced to Maranha ˜o
was ‘Carolina white’, which made its appearance in 1766.
56The husking
and pounding mills that developed over the second half of the eighteenthcentury signiﬁcantly reduced the arduous labour demands of milling theentire export crop by hand with the pila ˜o, which was previously the only
way to process rice. The husking mills removed the indigestible hulls fromthe grains.
57But until efﬁcient water-driven stone mills came into operation
in 1774, the second processing step – polishing the grain to achieve thewhiteness desired in export markets – still depended upon the pila ˜o.
58
The rice and cotton plantation economy demanded enslaved labour. The
metropolis licensed two trading companies in 1755 to deliver slaves toBrazil, granting the Companhia Geral do Gra ˜o-Para ´e Maranha ˜o the exclusive
right to supply slaves to the eastern Amazon region. Over the next 22 years ofits operation, the Company shipped more than 25,000 slaves directly from
FIGURE 4
MILLED RICE AND COTTON EXPORTS, SA ˜OL U I ´S TO PORTUGAL 1760–1811
Source : (Years 1760–78) Nunes Q3 Dias 1970, p.430.RICE IN COLONIAL BRAZIL 13


===== Page 14 =====
West Africa to Maranha ˜o and Para ´(Figure 5). Of the total, some 70 per cent or
17,591, originated in the Guinea ports of Bissau and Cacheu. About 9,000 –one-third of the total – disembarked at Sa ˜oL u ı ´s, Maranha ˜o to carry out the
gruelling work of transforming wetlands into rice paddies.
59A substantial per-
centage of the enslaved Africans arriving in Maranha ˜o at the onset of rice
plantation development originated in West Africa’s indigenous rice region,
where sophisticated wetland systems had supplied Portuguese ships with sur-pluses since the ﬁfteenth century. The slaves commanding the highest priceswere those from ethnic groups experienced in rice cultivation (the Bissago,Feloup [Diola], and Balanta).
60In selecting slaves with this prior experience,
the Portuguese emulated the pattern of deliberate imports of enslaved Africanswith experience growing rice that also proved characteristic of the Carolinarice economy.
61The Crown’s economic stimuli resulted in a vast output of
rice and cotton exports from Maranha ˜o that endured long after the Company’s
commercial monopoly terminated in 1778 (Table 1).
The techniques of rice culture established in Maranha ˜o followed those
long used in West Africa. The ﬁeld was cleared of brush and burned prior
FIGURE 5
SHIPPING ROUTES OF MONOPOLY TRADING COMPANIES
Sources : Adapted from Carreira Q3 1983, p.57; Nunes Dias 1970, p.461.14 SLAVERY AND ABOLITION


===== Page 15 =====
to cultivation. With a long handled hoe, it was readied for sowing, which
involved puncturing the ground with a stick, dropping the grains of rice intothe hole and covering it with the foot, a method also established on Carolinarice plantations.
62The rice was harvested and cut ‘with a small knife, cutting
the stems one by one ...[and] at night beating them with a branch to loosen
the grains’.63
Lisbon attempted to stimulate Maranha ˜o’s plantation sector by advancing
just a few large landholders credit for purchasing the improved Asian rice seed,
mechanical mills, and imported slaves.64The monopoly, however, fostered a
dependency relation between the majority of growers, who did not receivesubsidies, and the mill owners and retailers who kept service charges high.Storage and shipping also compounded problems, as the stored productTABLE 1
MILLED RICE AND COTTON EXPORTS SA ˜OL U I ´S TO PORTUGAL SELECTED YEARS,
1760–1812
YearRice Q4 tons
(metric)Rice
arrobas1Cotton tons
(metric)Cotton
arrobas
1760 95.62 6,510
1761 76.33 5,1971762 49.88 3,3961763 53.74 3,6591764 95.12 6,476
1765 110.47 7,521
1766 164.76 11,2171767 3.30 225 186.61 12,7051768 4.01 273 349.72 23,8101769 8.15 555 374.10 25,4701770 9.21 627 228.28 15,542
1771 119.46 8,133 176.48 12,015
1772 443.83 30,217 546.92 37,2361773 844.05 57,465 599.46 40,8131774 747.91 50,920 308.36 20,9941775 1,609.79 109,599 380.21 25,8861776 1,103.86 75,154 374.85 25,5211777 2,127.48 144,845 595.64 40,553
1778 1,895.22 129,032 558.89 38,051
1788 4,603.72 313,434 932.83 63,5101805 3,455.25 235,243 2,477.76 168,6931806 5,498.17 374,331 2,599.91 177,0091807 4,723.59 321,595 3,032.32 206,4491808 1,228.99 83,673 864.73 58,873
1809 5,529.62 376,472 5,908.16 402,244
1810 3,731.82 254,073 4,198.76 285,8631811 3,788.21 257,912 4,385.57 298,5821812 no data 3,194.21 217,471
Note : 1. arroba: former Portuguese measurement of weight, used in Brazil (1 arroba ¼14.688
kilograms).RICE IN COLONIAL BRAZIL
15


===== Page 16 =====
suffered losses from mould and infestation while periodic delays in the onset
of the rainy season meant the crop was not always milled when the shippingﬂeet departed for the metropolis in August and September.
65The presence of
such problems meant that many of the smaller-scale producers could notafford to process their rice mechanically and required their enslaved labour
to carry out this onerous task. For local markets and subsistence, rice contin-
ued being milled by hand, as in Africa, with the pila ˜o.
66Two systems of rice
production consequently operated in the plantation area of Maranha ˜o, one for
export, monopolized by capitalized large growers with mechanical devices formilling, the other by growers who were in a dependent relationship to themand whose production satisﬁed local markets as much as export ones.
The year 1767 witnessed the ﬁrst exports of milled rice to Portugal, 225
arrobas (3.3 metric tons) (Table 1). By 1781 production in the eastern
Amazon (chieﬂy Maranha ˜o) satisﬁed the metropolis’s entire import
demand, which enabled Lisbon to bar the importation of rice from Carolinaaltogether.
67Production peaked at 313,434 arrobas (4,604 metric tons) in
1788 before declining to an annual average of 272,000 arrobas (3,994metric tons) during 1805–11, inﬂuenced by the combined effects of cheaperrice from South Carolina, the Napoleonic upheavals in Europe, and theroyal government’s exile to Rio de Janeiro.
68After Brazilian independence
in 1822, rice exports to Portugal subsided, and the cereal resumed its import-
ance as the regional dietary staple. Maranha ˜o remained Brazil’s leading rice
producer until the second half of the twentieth century when developmentof ‘green revolution’ varieties, double cropping and pump-irrigated systemsshifted commercial production to the country’s South.
69
However, Maranha ˜o’s transition to a rice plantation economy was an
uneven process. Another type of rice, long planted for subsistence, to begrown[???]. Q5 This was the arroz vermelho (red rice) or arroz da terra
(country rice) that was cultivated in a variety of environments. Grown since
‘remote times’ and easily shattered with milling, this rice may well have
been African glaberrima .
70Perhaps it was deliberately planted for its distinc-
tive nutty taste and cultural signiﬁcance. Slaves in South Carolina continuedgrowing a variety known as ‘Guinea rice’ on their individual plots in theearly nineteenth century despite the cultivation of higher-yielding rice asthe plantation crop.
71Initially encouraged for its ease of cultivation and the
sustenance it gave the poor, arroz vermelho was eventually perceived to be
a problem on rice plantations seeded to the ‘Carolina white’ variety.
Maranha ˜o’s traditional red rice was ofﬁcially outlawed in 1772, when
Governor Joaquim de Mello e Po ´voas forbade its cultivation in favour of
the imported Carolina varieties. The Governor’s repeated attempts to suppressplanting the red rice, however, had faced ‘strong opposition on the part offarmers, who didn’t want to adopt a substitute variety for the red’.
7216 SLAVERY AND ABOLITION


===== Page 17 =====
Growers preferred cultivating the local rice, which was heavier and larger
grained, and because there was a shortage of mechanical mills to processthe Carolina variety.
73Seeking to eradicate it completely, the Governor
enacted punitive measures against those caught growing the red rice. Heapplied these measures across the entire region, where rice formed an important
subsistence crop and quilombos (Portuguese: maroon communities) ﬂour-
ished. For whites caught planting the red rice, he decreed a mandatoryyear’s jail sentence and ﬁne; Indians doing so faced two years imprisonment;slaves were whipped as well as sentenced to two years imprisonment.
74
While the reasons for the Governor’s severe measure are not speciﬁed, it
invites speculation. The interdiction suggests that red rice was widely grownas a food crop but that its cultivation reduced the quality of the product pro-duced on the plantations. In rice areas across the world, birds are considered
problems to cultivation. They eat the grain but also disperse it elsewhere,
thereby introducing undesirable varieties that reduce quality and yield.Another concern of the plantation rice sector in Maranha ˜o was to obtain a
‘perfect milling so that the seeds would not break’.
75The ban on red rice
cultivation perhaps aimed to prevent its mixture with Carolina white, eitherin the ﬁeld or in the mills. The rice export economy depended upon aproduct of consistent quality, namely, seed of uniform property and avariety whose grains would not break in the mechanical water mills in use
for hulling. Milling dissimilar rice varieties together increases the potential
for breakage, which reduces the market price. If arroz vermelho was
African glaberrima , the Governor’s action would make additional sense.
The prospect of commercializing African rice for gourmet markets is fru-strated to this day by its propensity to break apart with mechanicalmilling.
76The only way to remove the hulls without shattering the grain is
by hand, with the pila ˜o, the African method still used in isolated hamlets
claiming quilombo descent in rural Maranha ˜o (Figure 6).
Governor Mello e Po ´voas’ proclamation illuminates the socio-economic
landscape of rice production in the eastern Amazon during the 1770s, wherea handful of wealthy landholders monopolized a plantation economy forexport. Placed in dependent relationships with them were those long accus-tomed to growing red rice: the poor, enslaved as well as free. For reasonsthat remain unclear, they resisted efforts in the 1760s aimed at coercingthem to abandon red rice cultivation; only the threat a decade later of draconianpunishment forced the recalcitrant to comply.
A social memory of red rice persists in the region to this day. ‘We remem-
ber this rice’ recalled one 83-year-old woman interviewed in August 2002.She farms land once part of a rice plantation owned by the Belfort family inthe Itapecuru ´-Mearim area. Dona Luciana told how her enslaved grandmother
deliberately planted this variety with her friends. ‘They carried the grains in aRICE IN COLONIAL BRAZIL 17


===== Page 18 =====
FIGURE 6
MORTAR AND PESTLE (PILA ˜O)Q6IN USE FOR MILLING RICE IN A QUILOMBO
COMMUNITY IN THE ITAPECURU ´-MEARIM REGION OF MARANHA ˜O
Photo by author, August 2002.18 SLAVERY AND ABOLITION


===== Page 19 =====
gourd that was placed in their belt when they left the plantation to grow it ...
Only these women knew about this rice’ she reﬂected ‘because it came withthem in their hair when they arrived here in Maranha ˜o as slaves’.
77
Her account contrasts profoundly with the version offered by the
nineteenth-century Brazilian historian, Ce ´sar Augusto Marques, who
claimed the red rice grown in Maranha ˜o from the region’s early settlement
period was also called ‘arroz de Veneza’ or Venetian rice.78Marques wrote
his history in 1870, nearly a century after the ban on cultivating red rice in1772. Two earlier documents informed his interpretation. One relates toan expedition by the Captain-General of Para ´and a group of Jesuit priests
in 1639, where the quality of rice growing near Bele ´m is favourably compared
with Venetian rice. Similarly, a report from a journey along the lower Amazonin 1749 indicates the presence of rice ‘of excellent quality and in the size of
its grain and ﬂavour is not inferior to that of Venice’.
79Other historians
writing in the twentieth century have repeated Marques and elaborated thecase for claiming the red rice as a Portuguese introduction of seed fromItaly by colonists from the Azores (where rice was not grown).
80There is
documentation that seeds accompanied the colonists when they arrived inPara´and western Maranha ˜o in the 1750s, but rice is not mentioned as one;
it was present aboard ship only as food (and thus milled).
81
On the other hand, arroz de Veneza is grown elsewhere in the North-east to
this day and remains a well-documented variety of sativa . Like other sativas ,i t
shows no propensity to break apart with mechanical milling.82A red sativa
from Venice certainly may have ﬁgured among those brought to the easternAmazon, since Portugal was importing rice from both South Carolina andItaly in the mid-eighteenth century and encouraging the migration of coloniststo the nascent plantation sector. However, the case for arroz de Veneza ’s can-
didacy as the red rice originally planted in Maranha ˜o in the 1600s still remains
weak. Marques, writing in 1870, is the ﬁrst to mention it; it does not ﬁgure in
two earlier accounts of the rice economy that date to the time of the Gover-
nor’s edict. If arroz de Veneza was the target of the ban, Raimundo Jose ´de
Sousa Gaioso (1747–1813), who completed the ﬁrst agricultural history ofMaranha ˜o, would surely have recorded its name. As a rice planter, Gaioso
was present in Maranha ˜o during the critical formative period of the rice
export economy. He mentions the Carolina rice introduction and the suppres-sion of the earlier red variety, arroz vermelho .
83
Arroz de Veneza similarly fails to appear in the commentary of Gaioso’s
contemporary, scientist Alexandre Rodrigues Ferreira, who concluded his
ten-year expedition to the eastern Amazon in 1793. Ferreira discusses thenew white rice arriving in Para ´during the 1760s, but calls it arroz vermelho
or red rice.
84It is only at the end of the nineteenth century that arroz de
Veneza makes its appearance in the historical record, when it serves as aRICE IN COLONIAL BRAZIL 19


===== Page 20 =====
platform to celebrate the enduring accomplishments of Portuguese settlers.
Revisionist claims by Marques and his successors fail to engage one criticalissue: why a Venetian sativa rice would be banned from cultivation when it
is easily milled to yield the desired whole white grains.
In a manner similar to the way that Carolina seed swept aside the
traditional red rice pioneered by New World Africans, nineteenth-century
accounts proffered a new version of Maranha ˜o’s rice history that claimed
the cereal’s origins as the product of Portuguese settlement, initiative andtriumph over adversity. Rice was made the colonizer’s achievement becauseseeds were privileged over the underlying knowledge systems that initiallypioneered the crop for subsistence and made rice fundamental to the Braziliandiet and colonial economy. The blacks and Amerindians who had cultivatedrice as a subsistence crop for nearly 150 years, as the result of a much
earlier convergence of their tropical farming systems, faded from view as a
new version of the grain’s introduction was sown.
Oral histories for the eastern Amazon provide a fresh perspective on
Brazilian rice history. In the sixteenth century enslaved Africans in Bahiaestablished a preferred dietary staple, the agronomic practices, and millingmethods that two hundred years later would lay the foundation for a riceplantation economy reliant on high-yielding Asian seeds. With the arrival inMaranha ˜o of more than ten thousand Africans in the mid-eighteenth century,
the signiﬁcance of rice as an African food crop was preserved in Brazil. In
written accounts it was a tale of Portuguese seed transfers and enterprise,but it is remembered in the oral traditions of those who escaped enslavementas grains stolen by the white plantation owner. This social memory makes seedtransfers an African narrative, linking it to the transatlantic slave-trade,African initiative and dietary preferences. Maroon legends from the riceplantation region preserve this subaltern voice of the cereal’s history inthe region.
Legend, Memory and Historical Consciousness
Rice was grown as a plantation and subsistence crop in the Brazilian states of
Amapa ´, Para ´and Maranha ˜o, where there are numerous communities that
claim descent from slaves. The arrival of more than twenty thousandAfrican rice growers in the formative period of plantation development(1755–77) was the prelude for a second inﬂux of slaves in the period
1812–20, when an additional 40,000 were brought to labour on rice and
cotton plantations.
85Maranha ˜o’s numerous rivers ran through areas
mantled with dense rainforests, conducive for slave escape and quilomboestablishment. The communities thrived by planting rice along with maizeand manioc, the indigenous Amerindian domesticates, for subsistence.
8620 SLAVERY AND ABOLITION


===== Page 21 =====
On the eve of independence (1822) Maranha ˜o held the greatest concentration
of slaves in Brazil and a very large quilombo population.87
In an isolated village in the eastern Amazonian state of Para ´, the maroon
legend of rice origins reappears, almost identical to the tale told by the Djukain Cayenne.
88It is recounted in an area where rice was never grown as a plan-
tation crop but widely planted for subsistence. An elderly quilombo woman,
who grew rice in her youth, narrates the account. She makes children theagents of rice dissemination when their mother, unable to prevent their ensla-vement, tucks the grains in their hair. Like the other accounts this versionafﬁrms the role of an enslaved female ancestor in the diffusion of rice seedsacross the Atlantic. It should be noted that alone among Africa’s cereals,rice has always been a crop associated with women.
89In attributing rice origins
to their ancestors, maroon legends reveal the ways in which the enslaved gave
meaning to the traumatic experiences of their own past while remembering the
role of the cereal in helping them resist bondage, survive as runaways, andcommemorate cultural identity.
90
However, in the Itapecuru ´-Mearim region of rural Maranha ˜o (Figure 2),
another aged female quilombola tells a slightly different version. It is worthrecording because this account appears to reveal a social memory ofBrazil’s rice plantation economy, which was centred in that region.
An enslaved African woman, unable to prevent her children’s sale into
slavery, placed some rice seeds in their hair so they would be able to eatwhen the ship reached its destination. As their hair was very thick, shethought the grains would go undetected. However, as they disembarked
the slave ship, the planter who eventually bought them discovered the
grains. In running his hands through one child’s hair, he found the seedsand demanded to know what they were. The child replied, ‘this is foodfrom Africa.’ This is the way rice came to Brazil, through the Africans,w h os m u g g l e dt h es e e d si nt h e i rh a i r .
By differing in one crucial detail, the Maranha ˜o rendition illuminates another
layer of memory and historical consciousness. When the white man discoversthe seeds in the child’s hair, he reveals complete ignorance of them.Upon learning what they are, he seizes the grains, and begins to grow rice.
It was as a plantation crop that the white man grew rice. And it is thesocial memory of Maranha ˜o’s rice plantations that appear to inform this
account.
The white man’s appropriation of rice in this version attests to the power
relations that transformed the cereal from a food to a plantation crop in themid-eighteenth century. The account also challenges a Eurocentric narrativeof agricultural development in the Americas that excludes African agencyand initiative. The development of rice plantations depended upon theRICE IN COLONIAL BRAZIL 21


===== Page 22 =====
appropriation of African expertise and labour, symbolized in the legend as the
slave owner taking away the rice seeds brought from Africa. In placing thatshift in terms of theft, the Maranha ˜o account reclaims rice as a narrative of
the African diaspora, thereby remembering the historical transition whentheir subsistence crop became a commodity produced under bondage. Rice,
and the knowledge of how to produce it, remains an African possession told
by the quilombo descendants of female slaves.
Conclusion
Enslaved Africans planted food crops on plantation provision ﬁelds as well as
in their dooryard gardens. The abundant (‘peasant breach’) literature on pro-vision grounds draws attention to its historical antecedents and the frequent
right of slaves to a personal subsistence plot and control over its income.
Less attention focuses on the plots’ possible role as sites for establishingAfrican dietary staples in the Americas.
91The practice of granting a small
plot to enslaved agricultural workers, Ciro Cardoso argues, became knownon New World plantations as the ‘Brazilian system’ for it is thought to havemade its ﬁrst appearance in Brazil’s North-east before spreading to theGuianas, West Indies and to the southern United States.
92This right, and its
relationship to growing rice, was underscored in one rebellion on a Bahian
sugar plantation in 1790. A peaceful return to the ﬁelds was resolved only
after planters agreed to the demand made by their slaves: ‘We shall be ableto plant our rice wherever we wish, and in any marsh, without asking per-mission for this’.
93
The enslaved grew subsistence as well as export crops in plantation econ-
omies. African domesticates formed an important component of the tropicalplants that fed the plantation world. Plants native to Africa valued as medic-inals and in the liturgical practices of syncretic religions also made their way
to the western Atlantic.
94The presence of rice among the cornucopia of native
African plants evident within the ﬁrst century of colonization reveals the pro-found role of enslaved Africans in establishing their botanical heritage in theAmericas. Rice cultivation provides a signature of the black Atlantic, linkingthe Upper Guinea Coast to Brazil and South Carolina, where it was grown forsubsistence prior to its cultivation as a plantation crop.
Africans actively shaped the early modern Atlantic world. Until the third
decade of the nineteenth century, they crossed the Atlantic in greater numbers
than Europeans. Their contributions to the economic and cultural develop-
ment of the Americas endured nearly four centuries yet are still not fullyacknowledged. An examination of rice reveals how Africans, despite enslave-ment, transferred an entire knowledge system, from production to consump-tion, and established a valued dietary staple in the American Atlantic.22
SLAVERY AND ABOLITION


===== Page 23 =====
NOTES
I would like to acknowledge the support of the National Geographic Society Committee on
Research and Exploration (award no.7095-01) for providing support for ﬁeldwork in Brazil aswell as the African and Latin American Studies Centers and the International Studies and OverseasProgram of UCLA for follow-up research. I also wish to thank Rosa Ac ¸evedo Marin for assistance
with ﬁeldwork and Ivan Rodrigues Costa of the Projeto Vida de Negro, Centro de Cultura Negra
do Maranha ˜o, in Sa ˜o Luı´s. Walter Hawthorne provided invaluable comments on an earlier draft of
this manuscript. My appreciation extends to Starr Douglas at Royal Holloway, University ofLondon for sharing an archival source from her research in the Swedish archives. My thanksare also due to Jose ´Almeida Pereira, Jacque Chase, Jeremy Ball, Richard Rosomoff and the
anonymous readers of this manuscript.
1. B.R. Lu, ‘Taxonomy of the Genus Oryza (Poacae): Historical Perspective and Current
Status’, IRRI Rice Research Notes , 24, 3 (1999), p.4–8.
2. A. Vaillant, ‘Milieu cultural et classiﬁcation des variete ´s de riz des Guyanes franc ¸ais
et hollandaise’, Revue internationale de botanique applique ´e et d’ agriculture tropicale ,
33 (1948), pp.520–29, p.522; Richard Price, First-Time: The Historical Vision of an
Afro-American People (Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983),
pp.89, 129; Peter Wood, ‘“It was a Negro Taught them”’: A New Look at African Laborin Early South Carolina’, Journal of Asian and African Studies , 9 (1974), pp.160–79, esp.
162, fn.1.
3. A.W. Crosby, The Columbian Exchange. Biological and Cultural Consequences of 1492
(Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1972); S.B. Alpern, ‘The European Introduction ofCrops into West Africa in Precolonial Times’, History in Africa , 19 (1992), pp.13–43;
Arturo Warman, Corn and Capitalism (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2003).
4. O. Ribeiro, Aspectos e problemas da expansa ˜o Portugue ´sa(Lisbon: Estudos de Ciencias
Polı´ticas e Sociais, Junta de Investigac ¸o˜es do Ultramar, 1962), p.86; Luis da Camara
Cascudo, Histo´ria da alimentac ¸a˜o no Brasil , 2 Vols. (Sa ˜o Paulo: Editora da Universidade
de Sa ˜o Paulo, 1983), I: p.243. In noting that rice never became part of Portuguese food
tastes, Cascudo (II: 516) nonetheless contends that in Brazil ‘curiously the Portuguese wasobstinate in planting rice, dry (upland) and in swamp lands, wherever he went’.
5. J. Carney, Black Rice: The African Origins of Rice Cultivation in the Americas (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 2001).
6. P. Wood, Black Majority (New York: Knopf, 1974); D.C. Littleﬁeld, Rice and Slaves (Baton
Rouge: Louisiana State University, 1981); Carney, Black Rice.
7. S.K. McIntosh, ‘Paleobotanical and Human Osteological Remains’, in S.K. McIntosh (ed.)
Excavations at Jenne-jeno, Hambarketolo and Kaniana in the Inland Niger Delta (Mali )
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994), pp.348–53.
8. R. Porte `res, ‘African Cereals: Eleusine, Fonio, Black Fonio, Teff, Brachiaria, Paspalum,
Pennisetum, and African Rice’, in J. Harlan, J. De Wet and A. Stemler (eds.) Origins of
African Plant Domestication (The Hague: Mouton, 1976), pp.409–52; C. Ehret, The Civiliz-
ations of Africa: A History to 1800 (Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 2002).
9. Carney, Black Rice ; B.L. Mouser (ed.), A Slaving Voyage to Africa and Jamaica: The Log of
the Sundown, 1793–1794 (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2002).
10. Mouser, Slaving Voyage , p.45 fn.170, p.86 fn.282, p.90 fn.295; L. Svalesen, The Slave Ship
Fredensborg (Boomington: Indiana University Press, 2000), p.107.
11. G. Dow, Slave Ships and Sailing (Salem, Mass.: Marine Research Society, 1927), pp.xxiii–xxiv;
E. Donnan, Documents Illustrative of the History of the Slave Trade to America ,4V o l s .


===== Page 24 =====
11. G. Dow, Slave Ships and Sailing (Salem, Mass.: Marine Research Society, 1927), pp.xxiii–xxiv;
E. Donnan, Documents Illustrative of the History of the Slave Trade to America ,4V o l s .
(1930–1935) (Washington DC: Carnegie Institution, 1932), Vol.III, pp.121, 376; Smeathmanto Drury, Sierra Leone, 10 July 1773. MS D.26 Uppsala; A. Carreira, As Companhias
Pombalinas de Gra ˜o-Para ´e Maranha ˜o e Pernambuco e Paraı ´ba(Editorial Presenc ¸a: Lisboa,
1983), pp.134–5; Mouser, Slaving Voyage , p.45, fn.170; p.8, fn.282; p.90, fn.295; p.99,
fn.317; B.L. Mouser, ‘Who and Where Were the Baga? European Perceptions from 1793 to
1821’, History in Africa , 29 (2002), pp.337–64, esp. 357, fn.42; Svalesen, Slave Ship , p.37.RICE IN COLONIAL BRAZIL
23


===== Page 25 =====
12. Quoted in Robert Voeks, Sacred Leaves of Candomble ´(Austin: University of Texas Press,
1997), p.23.
13. W. Dean, With Broadax and Firebrand. The Destruction of the Brazilian Atlantic Forest
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995), pp.55, 127–8; A.J.R. Russell-Wood, The
Portuguese Empire, 1415–1808: A World on the Move (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1992), pp.157–63; F. Hall, W.F. Harrison, D. Winters Welker, Dialogues
of the Great Things of Brazil (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1987),
pp.228–30. 235, 241.
14. Cascudo, Histo´ria da alimentac ¸a˜o; K. Hess, The Carolina Rice Kitchen: The African
Connection (Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1992).
15. This method was not used in Europe at the time for milling cereals. Ribeiro, Aspectos e
problemas , pp.23, 98; Vitorino Magalha ˜es Godinho, Os descobrimentos e a economia
mundial (Lisbon: Editora Arca ´dia, 1965 ), 2 Vols., II p.391.
16. Vaillant, ‘Milieu cultural’; R. Porte `res, ‘Pre ´sence ancienne d’une variete ´cultive ´ed ’Oryza
glaberrima en Guyane franc ¸aise’, Journal d’agriculture tropicale et de botanique applique ´e,
11, 12 (1955), p.680; R. Porte `res, ‘Un proble `me Ethnobotanique: relations entre le riz ﬂottant
du Rio Nunez et l’origine me ´dinige ´rienne des Baga de la Guine ´e franc ¸aise, Journal
d’agriculture tropicale et de botanique applique ´e, 11, 10–11 (1955), pp.538–42; R. Porte `res
‘Riz subspontane ´s et riz sauvages en El Salvador (Ame ´rique Centrale)’, Journal d’agriculture
tropicale et de botanique applique ´e,7 ,9 – 1 0( 1 9 6 0 ) ,p p . 4 4 1 – 6 .
17. P.D. Curtin The Atlantic Slave Trade (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1969),
pp.103–4, 108.
18. D. Eltis, S. Behrendt, D. Richardson and H. Klein (eds.) The Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade:
A Database on CD-ROM (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999).
19. F.C. Hoehne, Bota´nica e agricultura no Brasil no se ´culo XVI (Sa˜o Paulo: Companhia Editora
Nacional, 1937).
20. G.C.X. Oliveira, ‘Padroes de variac ¸a˜o fenotı ´pica e ecologia de Oryzae (Poaceae) selvagens
da Amazo ˆnia’ (MA thesis, Universidade do Sa ˜o Paulo, 1993).
21. However, colour alone is not diagnostic of African rice. There also exist red Asian varieties.22. A. Wagner (ed.), Terras de preto no Maranha ˜o: Quebrando o mito de isolamento (Sa˜o Luı´s:
Projeto Vida de Negro, 2002), p.92.
23. F. Mauro, ‘Portugal and Brazil: Political and Economic Structures of Empire, 1580–1750’,
in L. Bethell (ed.), Cambridge History of Latin America , 11 Vols. (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1984), Vol. I, p.457; P. Verger, Trade Relations between the Bight of
Benin and Bahia from the Seventeenth to the Nineteenth Century (Ibadan, Nigeria: Ibadan
University Press, 1976), p.2.
24. Records and estimates from the region vary between several hundred per annum to 2,000–
5,000 annually over the period from 1580–1640, when Spain ruled Portugal. See F. Bowser,The African Slave in Colonial Peru, 1524–1650 (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1974),
pp.39–43. While 42 per cent of Africans enslaved between 1601–1700 went to Brazil, the
largest gaps in the transatlantic database are for the Portuguese trade. See D. Eltis, ‘TheVolume and Structure of the Transatlantic Slave Trade: A Reassessment’, William and
Mary Quarterly , 58, 1 (2001), pp.17–45. For an excellent review of estimates on slaves
exported from the Upper Guinea Coast, and their disproportionate representation in thisearly period from rice-growing coastal societies, see W. Hawthorne, Planting Rice and
Harvesting Slaves (Portsmouth, New Hampshire: Heinemann, 2003), pp.67–9.
25. Jose ´Almeida Pereira, Cultura do arroz no Brasil (Teresina, Piauı ´: EMBRAPA, 2002), p.47.
26. Soares quoted in Hoehne, Botanica e agricultura , p.187; Ribeiro, Aspectos e problemas ,
pp.153–4.
27. Branda ˜o’s comments may refer to his ﬁrst stay in Brazil (from 1583–97) or his permanent


===== Page 26 =====
26. Soares quoted in Hoehne, Botanica e agricultura , p.187; Ribeiro, Aspectos e problemas ,
pp.153–4.
27. Branda ˜o’s comments may refer to his ﬁrst stay in Brazil (from 1583–97) or his permanent
resettlement there (from 1607). Hall et al., Great Things , pp.9–10, 197–9.
28. Sima ˜o Esta ´cio da Silveira [1624] Relac ¸a˜o Suma ´ria das Cousas da Maranha ˜o(Sa˜o Paulo:
Editora Siciliano, 2001), p.18.
29. Vitorino Magalha ˜es Godinho, Os descobrimentos e a economia mundial (Lisbon: Editorial
Presenc ¸a, 1983), 4 Vols., IV, p.44.24 SLAVERY AND ABOLITION


===== Page 27 =====
30. A.R. Ferreira, ‘Diario da viagem philosophica pela Capitania de Sao Jose ´do Rio Negro com
a informac ¸a˜o do estado presente’, Revista Trimensal do Instituto Histo ´rico, Geogra ´phico
e Ethnogra ´phico do Brazil , 48 (1885), pp.1–77, 75; Raimundo Jose ´de Sousa Gaioso,
Compe ˆndio histo ´rico-polı ´tico dos princı ´pios da lavoura do Maranha ˜o(Paris: Rougeron,
1818), p.181; Jose ´Fusetti de Viveiros, ‘Cultura do arroz no Estado do Maranha ˜o’,Boletim
do Ministe ´rio da Agricultura, Indu ´stria e Come ´rcio, 2 (1928), pp.201–5.
31. Hoehne, Botanica e agricultura , p.187; G. Brooks, Landlords and Strangers. Ecology,
Society and Trade in Western Africa, 1000–1630 (Boulder: Westview Press, 1993), p.149.
32. Russell-Wood, Portuguese Empire , pp.30–42.
33. Brooks, Landlords and Strangers , pp.147, 164–5.
34. Pereira, Cultura do arroz , p.50.
35. Godinho, Descobrimentos [1965], II, p.391.
36. Ribeiro, Aspectos e problemas , pp.143–7; T.B. Duncan, Atlantic Islands: Madeira, the
Azores, and the Cape Verdes in Seventeenth Century Commerce and Navigation (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1972), p.168; J.W. Blake, West Africa: Quest for God and
Gold, 1545–1578 (London: Curzon Press, 1977), pp.91–2; Brooks, Landlords and Strangers ,
pp.130–47, 279; Dean, Broadax ,p . 5 5 .
37. Carreira, Companhia Pombalinas , p.110. Author translation.
38. Curtin, Atlantic Slave Trade , p.96.
39. Carney, Black Rice , pp.13–15.
40. See for example, Ribeiro, Aspectos e problemas.
41. Godinho, Descobrimentos , [1965], II, p.391; Ribeiro, Aspectos e problemas , pp.23, 98.
42. Godinho, Descobrimentos , II, pp.390–93; Brooks, Landlords and Strangers , p.149.
43. Manuel Vianna e Silva, Elementos para histo ´ria do arroz em Portugal (Coimbra: Nova Casa
Minerva, 1955), p.7.
44. Silva, Elementos para histo ´ria do arroz em Portugal , p.7. Rice consumption is not mentioned
in Anto ´nio H. de Oliveira Marques, Daily Life in Portugal in the Late Middle Ages (Madison:
University of Wisconsin, 1971).
45. D. Alden, ‘Late Colonial Brazil, 1750–1808’, in L. Bethell (ed.), Cambridge History of Latin
America , 11 Vols. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984), Vol. II, p.639.
46. M. Nunes Dias, Fomento e Mercantilismo: A Companhia Geral do Gra ˜o Para ´e Maranha ˜o
(1755–1778). 2 Vols. (Bele ´m: Universidade Federal do Para ´, 1970), Vol. I, pp.445–51.
47. Warman, Corn , pp.106–7.
48. The rice plantations north of the Amazon River in Amapa ´fell under the jurisdiction of Para ´.
Rosa Acevedo Marin, A Escrita do histo ´ria paraense (Bele´m: Universidade Federal do Para ´,
1997), pp.59–61.
49. T.F. Glick, Irrigation and Society in Medieval Valencia (Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1970); A.M. Watson, Agricultural Innovation in the Early Islamic World: The
Diffusion of Crops and Farming Techniques, 700–1100 (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1983).
50. Silva, Arroz em Portugal , p.22; V.C. de S.S. Telles, Memo ´ria sobre a cultura do arroz em
Portugal e suas conquistas (Lisbon: Casa Littera ´ria do Arco de Cego, 1800), pp.6–15.
51. Cascudo, Histo´ria Q7 da alimentac ¸a˜o, pp.526–517.[???]
52. Carney, Black Rice ; on Brazil, see Jero ˆnimo de Viveiros, Histo´ria do come ´rcio do Maranha ˜o
(1612–1895) 4 Vols (Sa ˜o Luı ´s: Associac ¸a˜o Comercial do Maranha ˜o, 1992), Vol.I p.309.
53. The oral traditions collected in rural Maranha ˜o are from communities that claim descent from
quilombos (maroons). However, the interviews may have also included hamlets descended
from enslaved rice growers who remained in the area without land titles followingemancipation (1888). Several elderly informants in the Itapecuru ´-Mearim area, for instance,
recounted family memories of the Belfort family whose Irish forebear, Laurence, establisheda large rice plantation and mill in the region during the 1760s. The quilombo communitiesidentiﬁed by Projeto Vida de Negro, a legal advocacy organization in Maranha ˜o, assists


===== Page 28 =====
many of these impoverished remote settlements in their efforts to obtain land titles, now
possible with changes in the 1988 Brazilian constitution that guarantees quilombo commu-nities rights to land ownership based on their heritage of ﬂight from slavery.RICE IN COLONIAL BRAZIL
25


===== Page 29 =====
54. Jero ˆnimo de Viveiros, Alcaˆntara no seu passado econo ˆmico, social e polı ´tico (Sa˜o Luı ´s:
Impresa Oﬁcial, 1999), p.61.
55. Nunes Dias, Fomento e Mercantilismo , Vol.I p.437–40, 445–51: Acevedo, Histo´ria
paraense , p.60.
56. Gaioso, Compe ˆndio, p.181; Manuel Pio Corre ˆa,Diciona ´rio das plantas u ´teis do Brasil ,6
Vols. (Rio de Janeiro: Imprensa Nacional, 1984), Vol.I p.173.
57. Nunes Dias, Fomento e Mercantilismo , Vol.I p.442; Acevedo, Histo´ria paraense , pp.69–70.
The ﬁrst of these mills came into operation in 1756 in Rio de Janeiro. D. Alden, ‘Manoel Luı ´s
Vieira: An Entrepreneur in Rio de Janeiro during Brazil’s Eighteenth Century AgriculturalRenaissance’, Hispanic American Historical Review , 39 (1959), pp.521–37, 531.
58. Acevedo, Histo´ria paraense , pp.69–70; Arquivo Pu ´blico do Estado do Maranha ˜o( A P E M )ﬁ l e
on rice plantation economy, years 1771–78; Nunes Dias, Fomento e Mercantismo ,V o l . I ,p . 4 4 2 .
59. The other company formed at the same time, the Companhia de Pernambuco e Paraı ´ba, held
the monopoly to supply sugar plantations with slaves from the region between Elmina
(Ghana) and Benguela (Angola). Some 7,774 enslaved Africans from Angola also arrived
on Company ships in Maranha ˜o and Para ´but Maranha ˜o received a fraction of the total,
1,296. Nunes Dias, Fomento e Mercantismo , Vol.I, p.465. See also, J.C. Miller, Way of
Death: Merchant Capitalism and the Angolan Slave Trade, 1730–1830 (Madison: University
of Wisconsin Press, 1988.), pp.574–5.
60. Carreira, Companhia Pombalinas , pp.78–9, 96–8; Gaioso, Compe ˆndio, pp.244–5; M. Klein,
‘The Portuguese slave trade from Angola in the eighteenth century’, in J.E. Inikori (ed.),
Forced Migration. The Impact of the Export Slave Trade on African Societies (New York:
African Publishing Company, 1982), pp.21–41. However, the Balanta apparently hadtaken up rice culture in response to the transatlantic slave trade as they retreated to isolated,coastal marshes in the seventeenth century to resist enslavement. See, Hawthorne, Planting
Rice, pp.48–9, 155–9.
61. Littleﬁeld, Rice and Slaves , pp.27–32; D. Richardson, ‘The British Slave Trade to Colonial
South Carolina’, Slavery and Abolition , 12 (1991), pp.125–72.
62. Nunes Dias, Fomento e Mercantilismo , Vol.I, p.443; see A.B. Huger Smith illustration in
Elizabeth Allston Pringle’s memoir, A Woman Rice Planter (New York, Macmillan, 1913).
63. F.A. Branda ˜o, Jr., A escravatura no Brasil precedida d’um artigo sobre a agricultura e
colonisac ¸a˜o no Maranha ˜o(Brussels: H. Thiry-Vern Buggenhoudt, 1865) reprinted in
R. Edgar Conrad, The Children of God’s Fire: A Documentary History of Black Slavery in
Brazil (The Pennsylvania State University Press: University Park, 1984), p.99.
64. The ﬁrst mechanical mill was built near Rio de Janeiro in 1756 while the earliest one in
Maranha ˜o was built by Irish plantation owner, Laurence Belfort. Alden, ‘Manoel Luı ´sV i e i r a ’ .
65. APEM; Nunes Dias, Fomento e Mercantilismo , p.441.
66. APEM; Acevedo, Histo´ria paraense , p.72–6.
67. C.R. Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 1415–1825 (London: Hutchinson, 1969),
p.192; Dean, Broadax , p.128; Gaioso, Compe ˆndio, p.181. Brazilian rice production had hurt
US producers severely in Portugal’s market. During the decade of the 1790s, only 5,320tons were exported to Portugal, less than 2 per cent of total rice exported. P. Coclanis,The Shadow of a Dream (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989), p.279, fn.47.
68. Nunes Dias, Fomento e Mercantismo , Vol. I, pp.446–51, Vol. II, pp.215–16.
69. Ma ´rio L. Ribeiro Mesquita, Germoplasma de arroz (Oryza sativa L.) coletado na microre-
gia˜o da Baixada Ocidental Maranhense (Sa˜o Luı ´s: EMAPA, 1984).
70. Ce ´sar Augusto Marques, Diciona ´rio histo ´rico-geogra ´ﬁco da Provı ´ncia do Maranha ˜o(Rio de
Janeiro: Cia. Editora Fon-Fon e Seleta, 1970), p.91; Viveiros, ‘Arroz no Estado’, pp.201–5.


===== Page 30 =====
70. Ce ´sar Augusto Marques, Diciona ´rio histo ´rico-geogra ´ﬁco da Provı ´ncia do Maranha ˜o(Rio de
Janeiro: Cia. Editora Fon-Fon e Seleta, 1970), p.91; Viveiros, ‘Arroz no Estado’, pp.201–5.
71. J. Drayton, A View of South Carolina (Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1972),
p.125.
72. Almeida, Cultura do arroz , p.80; Alexandre Rodrigues Ferreira, Viagem Filoso ´ﬁca ao Rio
Negro (Bele´m: Museu Paraense Emı ´lio Goeldi, 1983), p.133.
73. D. Alen, ‘Late Colonial Brazil, 1759–1909’, in L. Bethell (ed.) Cambridge History of Latin
America , (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984) Vol. II, p.641.
74. Marques, Diciona ´rio, p.435–6; Dias, Fomento , Vol. I, p.435.26 SLAVERY AND ABOLITION


===== Page 31 =====
75. Quoted from Viveiros, Histo´ria do come ´rcio, Vol. I, pp.201–3.
76. National Research Council (NRC) Lost Crops of Africa , (Washington DC: National
Academy Press, 1996).
77. Oral history collected by the author in Aug. 2002.78. Marques, Diciona ´rio, p.91.
79. Almeida, Cultura do arroz , pp.76–8; Manuel Vianna e Silva, ‘Elementos para histo ´ria do
arroz no Brasil’, Lavoura Arrozeira , 4, 39 (1950), pp.11–16, 14.
80. Viveiros, Arroz no Estado do Maranha ˜o, p.201.
81. Viveiros, Histo´ria do come ´rcio, Vol. I, p.80.
82. Almeida, Cultura do arroz , pp.82–3.
83. Gaioso, Compe ˆndio, p.181.
84. Ferreira, Viagem Filoso ´ﬁca, p.133.
85. The concentration Q8 of slaves on rice and cotton plantations made Maranha ˜o the region with the
highest percentage of enslaved persons in the Portuguese Empire (55 per cent). Matthias
Ro¨hrig Assunc ¸a˜o, ‘Quilombos Maranhenses’, in Joa ˜o Reis and Fla ´vio dos Santos Gomes
(eds.), Liberdade por um ﬁo. Histo ´ria dos quilombos no Brasil (Sa˜o Paulo: Companhia das
Letras, 1996), pp.433–66 esp. 434.
86. Matthias Ro ¨hrig Assunc ¸a˜o, ‘Quilombos Maranhenses’, p.448; Conrad, Children of God’s
Fire, pp.389–90.
87. On locations of quilombos in nineteenth-century Maranha ˜o, see the document reprinted from
1853, reprinted in Conrad, Children of God’s Fire , pp.387–8. Maranha ˜o today claims the
largest number of quilombo communities in Brazil, where 443 of the estimated total 743,are located. Wagner, Terras do Preto , p.17.
88. See note 2; Carney ﬁeldwork interviews, Aug. 2002. The oral histories recorded in this
section were collected by Carney and Acevedo in Para ´and Maranha ˜o. While the identity
of the communities is protected, in Para ´, they are located within a half-day journey by
boat and car from the state capital, Bele ´m, towards the state boundary with Maranha ˜o. In
Maranha ˜o, the interviews took place in hamlets north-west and south-east of Sa ˜o Luı ´s
between Alca ˆntara and the town of Itapecuru ´-Mirim.
89. Two major farming systems have historically characterized African rice production: one
where only women grow the cereal, the other where men and women both participate butspecialize in speciﬁc ﬁeld tasks. This distinction receives attention in early Europeanaccounts of the Upper Guinea Coast. Carney, Black Rice , pp.49–55.
90. Pier Larson, History and Memory in the Age of Enslavement (Portsmouth, New Hampshire:
Heinemann, 2000).
91. But see, J. Chaplin, An Anxious Pursuit: Agricultural Innovation and Modernity in the Lower
South, 1730–1815 (Chapel Hill, 1993), p.156; J. Carney, ‘African Rice in the Columbian
Exchange’, Journal of African History , 42, 3 (2001), p.377–96.
92. Ciro Flamarion S. Cardoso, ‘The Peasant Breach in the Slave System: New Developments in
Brazil’, Luso-Brazilian Review , 25, 1, pp.49–57.
93. S.B. Schwartz, ‘Resistance and Accommodation in Eighteenth Century Brazil: The Slaves’
View of Slavery’, Hispanic American Historical Review , 57, 1, pp.69–81.
94.
1R. Price, ‘Subsistence on the Plantation Periphery: Crops, Cooking, and Labour among
Eighteenth-Century Suriname Maroons’, Slavery and Abolition , 12, 1 (1991), pp.107–27;
Voeks, Sacred Leaves ; Hall et al. ,Great Things , pp.191–220, 232–5, 241–4; J. Carney
‘African Traditional Plant Knowledge in the Circum-Caribbean Region’, Journal of Ethno-
biology , 2 (forthcoming).RICE IN COLONIAL BRAZIL 27


===== Page 32 =====
Journal... Salvery and Abolition  Article ID… FSLA100001  
 
TO: CORRESPONDING AUTHOR  
 
AUTHOR QUERIES - TO BE ANSWERED BY THE AUTHOR  
 
The following queries have arisen during the typesetting of your manuscript. Please answer the queries  
. 
Q1 Figure 2 Sourc e: Base map adapted from Hal et al.  1987, p.2  
Pls ensure full ref. To Hal et al.  appears here or in endnotes. Has 
permission been sought?   
Q2 Figure 3 Gomes 1997, p. 216. [???]   
Q3 Figures 4, 5. Ensure permission   
Q4 Table 1 (what was originally Fig. 6)  Gayozo 1818 not in notes section, 
pls supply full ref.   
Q5 However, Maranhão’s transition to a rice plantation economy was an 
uneven process. Another type of rice, long planted for subsistence, to 
be grown[???].  
Text missing? Pls review this sentence, me aning unclear.   
Q6 NB Figure 6 was originally Fig. 7.   
Q7 Note 51. Cascudo, História da alimentação , pp.526 -517. [???]   
Q8 Only Gomes in notes section is 1996 – note 85. Again, ensure 
permission.   
   
   
   
   
Production Editorial Department, Taylor  & Francis Ltd.  
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon OX14 4RN  
 
Telephone: +44 (0) 1235 828600  
Facsimile: +44 (0) 1235 829000