PREFACE

Leidy cleared gravel and stones from a wooden sluice wedged in a gully
between two slopes. Caked mud streaked her legs, and dirty water coursed
around her feet and along the sluice. The sluice was a plank of wood with
roughly cut boards nailed on both sides over a metal grill and a red sack.
At the far end of the sluice, Leidy's mother worked. Her gray skirt hung
over black rubber boots. Leidy's younger sister was there too, dressed in
denim short-shorts, a purple T-shirt, a bandana, and a rakish smile looking
back at my camera.

An hour before, the four of us had hiked the twenty minutes from the river
to their mine. We had trailed half a dozen men and boys from a small
community in the Chocó, Colombia's northwest Pacific region of rain forests
and rivers. I carried my camera, Leidy a digital music player, and one of
the boys a blackened pot with a bag of rice inside; another young man
balanced a gasoline-powered water pump on his upper back. The others
carried shovels, wooden pans, and metal spikes — the tools of their trade
as artisanal gold miners. We had begun at a cobble beach, passed through
the jungle, and then come to a wide-open space of sand and mud and gravel
that had been dug up by a pair of excavators made in Japan. Below an
embankment and beside a large pool, a family used streams of water from a
pump to cut through gouges left by the excavators, owned by illegal and
informal small-scale miners who had packed up and gone upriver to mine
away a hillside above a productive tunnel and start a new excavator mine.

It was 2010, my third visit to such a mine, and all of us were after gold.

How does a gold rush shape the lives of those who live alongside it? There
is no single answer. Dwelling on the hopes and the dreams, the successes
and the failures, the strategies and the tactics of those after el oro in
the most impoverished region of Latin America's second-most inequitable
country tells unexpected stories of the production, accumulation, and
transformation of value.

The colloquial Colombian term for the temporary, contingent, creative, and
mobile world of informal work is rebusque, translated here as "shifting."
This word draws on an older English etymology — it does not mean working
for a set period at a factory but instead references the odd jobs and
short-term hustles described in the epigraph taken from Colombian writer
David Sánchez Juliao's short story "The Arrow."

— excerpted from Tubb, Shifting Livelihoods (2020)
